The year was 1572, the battle of Gujarat was over and once again the Mughal emperor Akbar and his fierce army proved victorious.
This scene, part of a double composition, was illustrated by the artists, Hussain Naqqash and Kesav in an attempt to depict part of the triumphant conquest that enabled a critical and strategic advantage for His Majesty and his empire, as it was an area containing numerous ports that wholly enveloped trade between Western Asia and India.
The scene is set in Fatehpur, the capital, in a beautifully constructed building where intense colors envelop the entire image, pertaining to the constant vibrancy in the artwork of this period.
Rich detail carved and painted into stone and large domes protruding off the page, additionally transports us deep into the elaborate setting where the court gathers.
The decorated trims and panels surround Akbar in elegant symmetry, aligning His Majesty in a powerful position.
In the upper right corner, peacocks trail along the sides of the buildings in full display of their vivid grandeur further exhibiting the sophisticated magnificence where Akbar sits in wait of the upcoming presentation.
Husain Quli Khan Jahan, a strong and loyal general in the emperor's army, is depicted here as a salient subject, paying his respects to Akbar from below;
“...during this happy time the great officers came to court from the provinces, and attained their desires. Among them was Husain Quli Khan, the governor of Lahore, who came with many officers of that province to do homage”.
The general stands out from the crowd of bodies gathered around him, in his dark, ornate dress, contrasted by the rich orange scarf elegantly draped around his shoulders.
His direct pose, gazing up at Akbar with intricate detail and his towering position demands us to further consider his importance as he delivers his esteem.
The courtiers, adorned with decorative attire and congregated below, direct their eyes and torsos towards the left, demonstrating their excitement towards the arrival of prisoners; presented on the additional page.
The bodies of the men shift in movement with their expressive faces turned to one another in enthusiastic conversation.
The prisoners, who, written in the Akbarnama, “had fallen into [Husain’s] hands in the battle, [were] wrapped up in cowhides from which the horns had not been removed”.
It is considered that these hides came from the 200 cows that had been slaughtered at a temple outside Nagarkot, as written in the Akbarnama.
This display was used as a technique to humiliate the prisoners and portray them as not humans, but animals, creatures less than.
Additionally, this powerful parade plainly drew an elated buzz from the attendees and further showcased the exultation from victory.
Akbar, seated high above the court, directs his gaze at the display below, appearing from a lavish balcony window.
The servants, positioned behind him, offering trays and fanning among the luxurious decor and plush carpets, assist our recognition of Akbars power.
As His Majesty surveys the mass of prisoners, concealed under their self-abasement, he “pardon(s) their wickedness and immediately order(s) that they should be set free from such a dress [and] ...should be made over to some place so that the real character of each might be ascertained”.
His merciful demonstration brings us closer to understanding Akbar’s nature during the duration of his reign which is a cause for his immense success as one of the most prominent Mughal rulers.